I had a hard time thinking about what to say to you today.  I didn't think I
could say anything that would better prepare you for your futures in your
careers or in graduate school; BYU already did that well enough.  My friend
Joshua Lutes recommended that I talk about dinosaurs, but I didn't think that
was a good idea.  I came to the conclusion that the most meaningful thing I
could speak to you about this morning was our potential for good as we go out
into the world.

There are a couple of songs whose words I find quite inspirational.  The first
starts like this:

"One heart broken by a careless word; a hundred voices cry, so rarely heard; a
thousand eyes that live inside the dark, waiting for a spark of light.  One
heart reaching for the least of them moves a hundred more to understand.  Soon
a thousand people called to serve change the world in time."

The second song goes:

"I am just one voice, but one voice can still be heard...  I am just one voice,
but one voice can carry far, rising through the noise of a world so damp and
dark."

We, all of us, have the potential to do great good in the world.  Though we may
feel small and insignificant, yet we can be great.  If we have such great
potential, and all of us do, why do we so often fail to live up to it? 

I believe that everyone, somewhere deep down, has the desire to be more than
they are, to live better, to be something great.  Perhaps you might call that a
heaven-sent "pull upward," God pulling us back to Him.  Elder Eyring called it
that, and he said that "that pull upward is far beyond what you would call a
desire for self-improvement.  When I felt it," he said, " I knew I was being
urged to live so far above myself that I could never do it on my own. ... You
feel an urging to rise above your natural self."  But again, if the desire is
there, why do people not follow it?

I've thought a lot about that question, and I have come to the conclusion that
people need someone to follow.  Rarely will a person spontaneously do something
great; almost always great demonstrations of valor, courage, and even kindness,
are caused by seeing the same actions done by someone else.

For example, I was on a trip in Mexico just after my mission, with my aunt and
four of my siblings.  We were driving down the freeway, and an enormous
rainstorm came out of nowhere, as can only happen in the tropics.  My aunt was
driving and didn't feel comfortable driving through that much rain, so she
pulled over to the side of the road.  Less than a minute after we pulled over,
a large road sign, one of the ones that goes really high and tells what exits
are coming up, was knocked over by the wind not 100 feet in front of us.  Part
of the sign was sticking out into the middle of the road.  We watched as
several cars went speeding by in the rain, a few barely seeing the fallen sign
in time to swerve out of the way.  "Someone is going to die," my aunt said.
"Someone is going to hit that sign and die."  So we decided to do something
about it.  My brother and I got out of the car, ran through the rain over to
the sign, and started pulling it out of the road.  It was really heavy, and we
were having a hard time.  But two other cars, when they saw what we were doing,
stopped and got out to help us move the sign.

When we had gotten the sign as far out of the road as we could, we got back in
our car.  The rain had mostly stopped, so we kept on driving.  I didn't think
much of that little experience until I started reading in my book, "1776" by
David McCullough, as we were driving away.  It just so happened that I was
reading about December of 1776, when Washington's army was deserting him
because their contracts were up, and he couldn't pay them.  To try to save
Washington's army and the cause of America, Thomas Paine wrote a little
pamphlet called "The American Crisis."  In it he wrote, "These are the times
that try men's souls: The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this
crisis, shrink from the service of his country; but he that stands by it now,
deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.  ...  What we obtain to cheap,
we esteem too lightly: it is dearness only that gives every thing its value."

The pamphlet was read aloud to the soldiers, and many decided to stay.  It was
the words of one man, Thomas Paine, that kept Washington's army together.  As I
read that story, I thought about what had just happened on the freeway.  We saw
a lot of cars go by that post, barely dodging it, but no one stopped to move
it.  Then we braved the raging storm and got out to move the sign.  Other
people saw our example, and a few stopped to help.  I really doubt that the
people that stopped would have done so had we not been there setting the
example.

People want to help.  People want something to live for, a good cause to devote
themselves to.  They want to be great.  But most of the time when the
opportunity comes we are too afraid or too busy or too lazy to do something
about it.  What it takes is a person, or people, who are willing to act when no
one else is acting, and to stand up for what is right in the face of those who
don't really care.  Then their example awakens the innate goodness in those
around them, and lives are changed.  

My plea to you this morning is that as you leave this university you be men and
women like Thomas Paine, people who lift and inspire those around you.  How
much good there is that we can do!  It doesn't take incredible physical
strength or mental ability; sometimes just a few words or a simple example will
do.  

Elder Neal A. Maxwell wrote a book called "The Enoch Letters," very similar to
C.S. Lewis' "Screwtape Letters."  It is a series of fictional letters written
by a man inside the city of Enoch to a friend outside.  One line in that book
is particularly relevant.  It says, "The subtle and wondrous efficiency of
righteous unity is found in the manner in which it moves each man to do more
than he ever imagined, or even wanted, to do himself.  Seeing others pass a
supposed breaking point without breaking, going a second mile with a burden
they are only required to carry one mile, witnessing those falsely accused
persist in sweet patience---there is a clear contagion in such things...  One
is simply inspired to do more."

As graduates of Brigham Young University we have the responsibility to be
great, to help the world be a better place.  We who have been given so much
must in turn give.  And we can.  All of us can choose, right now, to be better
than we were yesterday, to more fully live up to the people we know we should
be.  To be good examples.  And in so doing, we can change the world in time.

The people that we become will influence the world's perception of Brigham
Young University.  May we so live as to reflect well on our alma mater, and,
more importantly, to draw the souls of those around us upward, to God.









