Machine learning techniques have proven to be incredibly useful for analyzing
huge amounts of data.  Companies like Google, Amazon and Netflix have made a
lot of money by coming up with good algorithms and infrastructure to solve
practical machine learning problems, such as "What are customers who bought
this item also likely to buy?"  While not one hundred percent accurate, these
techniques are able to make very good predictions by analyzing the behavior of
a large number of users of their systems.

While machine learning algorithms have been used in a variety of disciplines,
their potential for improving our health care and medical knowledge is largely
untapped.  There are a few very important reasons for this, including the lack
of a large collection of data and consumer privacy concerns.  However, if
these barriers could be overcome, our ability to diagnose and effectively
treat many modern ailments, and recognize new ones, would increase
dramatically.

The first obstacle that would need to be overcome in using machine learning to
analyze health data is the lack of a centralized data source.  Many hospitals
and doctors have a lot of health information about a lot of people, but it is
not centralized and available to people wanting to analyze it for research
purposes.  Google tried to solve this problem with the creation of its Google
Health website, but the adoption of that service was rather small.  Electronic
health records are also a step in the right direction, but again there is no
central resource for researchers to access a large collection of electronic
health records.  In order for machine learning to assist our efforts to
improve health care, some kind of central repository for health information
needs to be created.

Such a central repository would have to address privacy concerns.  Having a
person's entire health history available to the general public, or even to
contracted researchers, is a serious breach of privacy that could have very
adverse effects.  To alleviate these concerns, any centralized health
information repository would have to provide health information to researchers
only after it has been wiped of any information that can identify specific
people.  Data such as health history, demographics, symptoms experienced, and
the results of treatments received can be recorded and disseminated without
needing to report date and location of birth, name, or social security number.
Even leaving those items out might not be enough, as people with bad
intentions could still try to link the health care data with other publicly
available data and circumvent the attempt at privacy.  If there were any one
obstacle that would prevent the creation of a centralized source of health
care data, it would be the failure to adequately address privacy concerns.

Once a central health information repository is established, researchers could
start having a heyday analyzing it.  There are plenty of machine learning
algorithms that could be applied to such a data source.  For example, a very
common machine learning task is that of classification, where the algorithm
tries to decide which class of things a particular item belongs to.  A spam
filter is such a classifier, deciding if any particular email is spam or not.
A classifier could be trained to decide which patients have Alzheimer's
disease, and the attributes the algorithm finds that are important in making
that decision could help researchers understand the causes of the disease, or
at least early warning signs.  Studies have been done before trying to answer
these questions, even with machine learning algorithms, but none with the
amount of data that would be available with a large central repository.

There are also many ailments that are rare or not very severe and are hard to
diagnose.  Gluten intolerance is an example of this--many people who have mild
gluten intolerance do not realize that it is the gluten in what they eat that
is causing their problems.  There are certainly still many other health
problems that elude our understanding because there is not enough data to find
consistency in their symptoms.  With a large source of health data, many new
conditions would most likely be discovered, and more rare conditions would be
better understood, enabling researchers to study them and devise treatments.
It is hard to overstate the potential such a data source would have to
revolutionize our health care industry.  I have mentioned just two of
countless possible applications of machine learning techniques to improve our
understanding of human health.

Laying aside the potential advances in medical knowledge that could come from
using machine learning to analyze health care data, the creation of a central
health information repository would still have benefits to our society.
Patients who change doctors would still have all of the records their former
doctors kept, and those records would be available to their new doctor upon
authorization by the patient.  Patients would not have to try to remember
every doctor they ever saw and what those doctors did when they move to a new
area.  If the patient had multiple specialists, they would all be able to
freely access and share information without messy paperwork that is liable to
get lost.  This has started to happen with electronic health records, but a
much greater benefit could be had from a wider adoption and a centralized
resource for those records.

In our society there are significant barriers to the creation and use in
research of a centralized health information repository.  Those barriers
include deciding who to trust the repository to and overcoming the privacy
concerns that would certainly be raised at the creation of such an
establishment.  The adoption of electronic health records by all hospitals and
doctors that are reluctant to accept the change is not a trivial matter,
either.  But the benefits that could be obtained from such a centralized
repository in terms of our ability to understand, diagnose, and treat disease
are worth the effort to overcome these obstacles.
