My dad got a PhD in physics.  His dad got a PhD in physics, and his
dissertation won a Nobel prize.  His dad, my great grandfather, was the founder
of modern soil physics.  My mom's dad was on the Manhattan project.  I grew up
with a love of physics, wanting to win a Nobel prize by coming up with a
Unified Field Theory.

When I got to college I set out to start my career in physics.  I had space to
fill in my schedule, so I decided to double major in computer science, because
it was also interesting to me.  I thoroughly enjoyed both my physics and my
computer science classes, though physics was still my top priority.

After my freshman year, I took a two year break from school, during which I
ended up learning Spanish and translating a lot between English and Spanish.
That experience got me thinking about machine translation, how fascinating and
life-changing it would be to build a system that could accurately interpret
between languages in real time, and my leaning towards computer science began
to grow greater than my leaning towards physics.

I got back to school and started working with a physics professor in his
research lab.  I found it rather boring, and that solidified my desire to go
into computer science instead of physics.  Since then I have been doing
research with a computer science professor, learning all about machine
learning techniques.  I spent a summer as an intern at Google and was even 
more fascinated by the kinds of problems that can be solved with computers.

There are so many ways that computers have the potential to dramatically
improve the way we live, from speech recognition and natural language
processing so that computers can understand spoken instructions, to robotic
medical assistants that can improve our health care, and large-scale data
analysis that can find associations and draw conclusions that humans could
never do on their own.  I want to solve problems that help make the world a
better place, and computer science is a great place to do that.
