I was sitting in a meeting, talking into a microphone in Spanish, interpreting
so that the non-English speakers wearing headphones could understand what was
going on.  I had interpreted like this many times in the last year, but this
time got me thinking.  What if you could get a computer do this, and do it
well?  I knew then that I had to change my major.

My major had been physics.  My father got a PhD in physics from Stanford.
His father got a PhD in physics from Harvard, and his dissertation, measuring
the spin of the electron, won a Nobel Prize.  His professor received the prize,
but my grandfather was a physics professor for many years.  My mother's father
was on the Manhattan project.  Suffice it to say, I grew up incredibly
interested in physics, determined to get a PhD and go on to win a Nobel Prize
some day.

Reality struck me around the time I started college, and I realized how
very unlikely it was that I would actually get a Nobel Prize.  I still wanted
to pursue my education in physics, and hopefully make some significant
contribution to the field, but my delusions of grandeur had subsided slightly.

As I went about my goal of a degree in physics, a few classes I took
kindled my interest in another field: computer science.  I enjoyed learning how
to program a computer, but the field didn't supplant my love of physics until
my experience with Spanish interpreting.  I realized that the problems I could
solve with computer science were a lot more interesting to me than physics.

With a newfound fascination for computers, I started looking into machine
learning and natural language processing.  I found that Dr. Kevin Seppi, a
professor whose class I was in, was the head of the Applied Machine Learning
(AML) lab at BYU, and the research he was doing piqued my interest.  I began
working for Dr. Seppi as a research assistant in December of 2007.  My
educational experience and my preparation for graduate school since then has
largely been shaped by my work with Dr. Seppi.

My first project in the AML lab was simply running experiments, using
particle swarm optimization (PSO) to help Dr. Campbell, a physics professor at
BYU, solve a crystallography problem.  Dr. Campbell had a model for what was
happening inside of a certain class of crystals, and he wanted to fit the
parameters of his model to the data he had collected.  Evaluating the
difference between his model's output and his data for each of tens of
thousands of data points took several minutes, so we had to use a parallel
optimization algorithm.  PSO is well suited to those problems, so I gained
experience both in how PSO works in general and in its use in a parallel
environment.  Early on I gave a presentation on how PSO can be used to solve
crystallography problems at BYU's Spring Research Conference.  Eventually I
discovered that the algorithm wasn't converging well because there were
correlated parameters in Dr. Campbell's model.  After that discovery we quickly
solved the problem.  Dr. Campbell's work is still ongoing, though he plans to
submit his work to the journal Science soon.

My initial work with PSO led me to a number of different projects.  Using
PSO in parallel led to some interesting research into communication among
particles in the swarm.  When running PSO in parallel, each processor controls
a single particle, and communication between particles in the algorithm
translates to inter-processor communication in the code.  A lot of
communication in the swarm, which is often desirable to quickly converge on a
good point, can be very time consuming.  To mitigate this problem, we devised a
randomized topology that approximates the effects of highly communicative
swarms with a much smaller communication cost.  This work, along with some
other results drawn from our experiments with large, parallel particle swarms,
was accepted at the Congress on Evolutionary Computation in 2009, one of two
top conference venues for PSO research.

Soon after that paper was accepted, Dr. Seppi presented me with another
possibility for parallel PSO.  In our earlier experiments, we had noticed that
for some functions, small swarms performing many iterations find better values
quicker than large swarms performing fewer iterations.  Dr. Seppi wondered if
it was possible to use extra processors in parallel to perform two iterations
of the PSO algorithm at a time.  I was intrigued with this idea and decided to
make it my honors thesis.  I developed an algorithm I called "speculative
evaluation in PSO" that evaluates all of the possible next positions of each
particle in parallel and picks the one that matches the actual behavior of the
particles, accomplishing the goal of performing two iterations at a time.  In
addition to submitting my work to BYU as my honors thesis, the paper describing
my new algorithm is currently under review for the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference, the other of the two top conferences for PSO research.

After completing my honors thesis, I was still interested in seeing what
further improvements could be made to speculative evaluation in PSO.  For the
past few months, I have been implementing my new ideas and running experiments,
and within the next month I will be submitting a paper detailing my original
algorithm and my improvements to Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, a
top journal for PSO and related research.

Along with particle swarm optimization, through my research I have also
gained an interest in natural language processing (NLP).  I took a course in
text mining that fascinated me, and that led me to work more closely with the
head of the NLP lab at BYU, Dr. Ringger.  Dr. Ringger taught me about latent
Dirichlet allocation, an algorithm used to discover latent topics in large
collections of documents.  I used latent Dirichlet allocation to analyze a
collection of about 8000 religious sermons given over the past 100 years.  I
discovered that the distribution of topics found in the sermons over time
correlated very well with real-world events that were happening during those
times, validating the algorithm and providing insight into the sermons
themselves.  That work has been accepted as a poster to the 50th Annual BYU
Studies Symposium, and I will be presenting it there next month.

My research experience as an undergraduate has solidified my desire to
pursue a graduate degree.  I love solving new problems, and the problems that
can be solved with computer science are incredible to me.



