What are the considerations involved in your choice of graduate school?

For a long time my school of choice was the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, mainly because that I always thought that it was the best, and I
wanted to go to the best school.  As I approached the end of my undergraduate
degree, however, I realized that I was really enjoying my time at Brigham Young
University, and I had a few projects that were very close to being ready to
publish.  Wanting to get a PhD at one of the nation's top universities, I
figured that having several publications, instead of merely hopes of
publishing, would give me a stronger application.  I also had taken some
graduate level classes at BYU that probably would not transfer to another
institution.  So I decided to stay at BYU for a masters degree, both because I
could complete it within a year and so that I could finish the work I had
started here.

During my time at BYU, my understanding of graduate institutions has also
matured.  There is no "best" school, especially across all areas of inquiry.
All schools have strengths and weaknesses, and a decision as large as where to
spend five years of your life should be based on something other than some
nebulous idea of who is "best" overall.  So I started looking at which schools
had strong programs and professors in areas I was interested in, their
publishing record, and what students in the program thought of their
professors.  I talked to the professors at BYU and read the websites of the
schools I was interested in.  The event that had the most influence on my
current choice of schools, however, was going to the conference of the North
American chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics in the summer
of 2010.  I was able to see first-hand the kind of research being done at each
institution, hear directly from the professors and students researching there,
and find out who was doing research that excited me.  It was at that conference
that I decided that I wanted to go to UC Berkeley, because I am really excited
to work on the problems they are working on.

