Movement 1:

The opening brings images of trotting along an Italian countryside

Crescendos to a high point, like you've arrived at a city.

Various solo instruments, as if you're talking to people in the city.

The theme comes back in the middle, as if telling people about your trip
through the countryside.

After a while the theme comes back again and stays - leaving the city.

Variation on the theme in minor, a little foreboding - maybe all is not well.
Develops the struggle for a while, seems like the dark is taking over.  Then
the dark recedes, there are hesitanting steps towards major again.  Conflict
seems to start to build, but the major theme wins out.

On to the conclusion.  A flute with a lot of motion, somewhat dance-like, in a
calm celebration.  The end brings back just a little bit of the conflict -
maybe you are describing your conflict to those you are celebrating with.  But
you end rejoicing.  

Movement 2:

Knowing that this was a religious procession affected the way I listened to it.
There were stoccato strings that seemed almost to give an effect of walking.
Mostly somewhat foreboding, as in a solemn procession, but there were some
light overtones in the woodwinds.  Though their religion is solemn, yet it
brings joy.  Towards the end, a little bit of back and forth, almost as if they
have arrived at their destination and the priest is conversing with someone.
Really quiet ending - no climax as in the previous movement.

Movement 3:

"Con moto moderato" - with motion, but moderate.  Not as energetic as the
first, perhaps contemplative after viewing the religious ceremony.  Pretty
mellow all the way through.  Some minor changes, but nothing dramatic.  A
really moderate ending, too.

Movement 4:

Starts out really fast, really sets you on edge and lets you know what's
coming.  After two mellow movements, a lot of contrast.  Based on some dances.
I think of something fast, like the cha-cha.  Changes after a bit to what seems
like a lighter, more stately dance, though then it goes back, so maybe it's
just a different section of the same dance.  Violins and violas going back and
forth with really fast runs, as if they are taking turns dancing.  Woodwinds
take a turn.  The last minute is build up to the final ending, a few false
climaxes, but a short crescendo to the very end.



















