CMU:

Resume:  Outline your education, research experience, work experience,
publications, scholarships awarded, prizes and honors received, society
memberships, and extracurricular activities.

Statement of Purpose: Prepare a concise one or two page essay in PDF format
that describes your primary areas of interest for research, your related
experiences, and your objective in pursuing a graduate degree at Carnegie
Mellon. Your essay should be specific in describing your interests and
motivations. When describing your research interests, you should explain why
you think they are important areas of study and why you are particularly
well-suited to pursue them. You should describe any relevant education,
research, commercial, government, or teaching experience. 

Publications (not an essay)

Fellowships (not an essay)



Berkeley:

Statement of Purpose: Please describe your aptitude and motivation for graduate
study in your area of specialization, including your preparation for this field
of study, your academic plans or research interests in your chosen area of
study, and your future career goals. Please be specific about why UC Berkeley
would be a good intellectual fit for you.

Personal History Statement: Please describe how your personal background
informs your decision to pursue a graduate degree. Please include information
on how you have overcome barriers to access higher education, evidence of how
you have come to understand the barriers faced by others, evidence of your
academic service to advance equitable access to higher education for women,
racial minorities, and individuals from other groups that have been
historically underrepresented in higher education, evidence of your research
focusing on underserved populations or related issues of inequality, or
evidence of your leadership among such groups.

Academic interests (faculty to work with, experiences, publications - not an
essay)

financial information




UMass:

academic honors or awards

teaching or tutoring experience

Personal Statement: Your Personal Statement should be a brief but carefully
written essay regarding: 1) the reasons you want to do graduate work in this
particular field, 2) your specific interests and experiences in this field, 3)
any special skills or experiences that may relate to an assistantship, and 4)
your career plans.





NDSEG:

Publications and presentations

Scholarships, academic honors, leadership roles, other recognition

Research experiences

Leadership experiences (400 characters)

Teamwork experiences

Memberships and certifications (ACL, PKP)

Community and volunteer work, interests and hobbies

Summary of goals: (3000 characters)

As part of this statement, we are interested in your ideas about:

the kinds of research in which you would like to be engaged during your
graduate study or in the longer term; or

specific research questions that interest you and how you became interested in
them.


Please discuss these research interests in sufficient detail for an expert who
is technically competent in your field to judge your understanding of the
questions to be addressed. This includes relevant hypotheses and approaches one
might take to answering the questions, and other research principles required
to investigate the research area you identify. 

We are interested in not only the science, but also your longer-term goals and
how the science fits into your life as an individual. We do not want this to
look like a grant submission.


